Chapter 10 of The Time Machine by H.G. Wells.
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
The Time Machine by H.G. Wells. Chapter 10.
About eight or nine in the morning, I came to the same seat of yellow metal from which I had viewed the world upon the evening of my arrival.
I thought of my hasty conclusions upon that evening and could not refrain from laughing bitterly at my confidence.
Here was the same beautiful scene, the same abundant foliage, the same splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river running between its fertile banks.
The gay robes of the beautiful people moved hither and thither among the trees.
Some were bathing in exactly the place where I had saved Weena, and that suddenly gave me a keen stab of pain.
And like blots upon the landscape, rosa cupulas above the waves to the underworld, I understood now what all the beauty of the overworld people covered.
A very pleasant was their day, as pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field.
Like the cattle, they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs, and their end was the same.
I grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had been.
It had committed suicide. It had set itself steadfastly towards comfort and ease.
A balanced society with security and permanency is its watchword.
It had attained its hopes to come to this at last.
Once, life and property must have reached almost absolute safety.
The rich had been assured of his wealth and comfort, the toilers assured of his life and work.
No doubt in that perfect world there had been no unemployed problem, no social question left unsolved, and a great quiet had followed.
It is a law of nature we overlook, that intellectual versatility is a compensation for change, danger, and trouble.
An animal, perfectly in harmony with its environment, is a perfect mechanism.
Nature never appeals to intelligence until habit and instinct are useless.
There is no intelligence, or there is no change, and no need of change.
Only those animals partake of intelligence that have to meet a huge variety of needs and dangers.
So, as I see it, the upper world man had drifted towards his feeble prettiness, and the underworld to mere mechanical industry.
But that perfect state had lacked one thing, even for mechanical perfection, absolute permanency.
Apparently, as time went on, the feeding of the underworld, however it was affected, had become disjointed.
Mother Necessity, who had been staved off for a few thousand years, came back again, and she began below.
The underworld being in contact with machinery, which, however perfect, still needs some little thought outside habit,
had probably retained, perforce, rather more initiative, if less of every other human character, than the upper.
And when other meat failed them, they turned to what old habit had hitherto forbidden.
So I say I saw it in my last view of the world, of 800 and 2,701.
It may be as wrong an explanation as mortal wit could invent.
It is how the thing shaped itself to me, and as that I give it to you.
After the fatigues, excitements, and terrors of the past days, and in spite of my grief,
the seat, and the tranquil view, and the warm sunlight were very pleasant.
I was very tired and sleepy, and soon my theorizing passed into dozing.
Catching myself at that, I took my own hint, and spreading myself out upon the turf, out a long and refreshing sleep.
I awoke a little before sunsetting.
I now felt safe against being caught napping by the moorlocks, and stretching myself.
I came on down the hill towards the white sphinx.
I had my crowbar in one hand, and the other hand played with the matches in my pocket.
And now came an almost unexpected thing.
As I approached the pedestal of the sphinx, I found the bronze valves were open.
They had slid down into grooves.
At that I stopped short before them, hesitating to enter.
Within was a small apartment, and on a raised place in the corner of this was a time machine.
I had the small levers in my pocket, so, here, after all my elaborate preparations for the siege of the white sphinx, was a meek surrender.
I threw my iron bar away, almost sorry not to use it.
A sudden thought came into my head as I stooped towards the portal.
For once, at least, I grasped the mental operations of the moorlocks.
Suppressing a strong inclination to laugh, I stepped through the bronze frame and up to the time machine.
I was surprised to find it had been carefully oiled and cleaned.
I've suspected since that the moorlocks had even partially taken it to pieces, while trying in their dim way to grasp its purpose.
Now, as I stood and examined it, finding a pleasure in the mere touch of the contrivance, the thing I had expected happened.
The bronze panel suddenly slid up and struck the frame with a clang.
I was in the dark, trapped. So the moorlocks thought. At that I chuckled gleefully.
I could already hear their murmuring laughter as they came towards me.
Very calmly, I tried to strike the match.
I had only to fix on the levers and depart them like a ghost.
But I had overlooked one little thing.
The matches were of that abominable kind, the light only on the box.
You may imagine how all my calm vanished.
The little brutes were close upon me.
One touched me.
I made a sweeping blow in the dark at them with the levers, and began to scramble into the saddle of the machine.
Then came one hand upon me, and then another.
Then I had simply to fight against the persistent fingers from my levers, and at the same time feel for the studs over which these fitted.
One, indeed, they almost got away from me.
As it slipped from my hand, I had to butt in the dark with my head.
I could hear the moorlock's skull ring, to recover it.
It was a nearer thing than the fight in the forest, I think, this last scramble.
But at last the lever was fitted and pulled over.
The clinging hands slipped from me.
The darkness presently fell from my eyes.
I found myself in the same gray light and tumult I've already described.